let's see Jarvis well Jarvis was was a friend of the
veterinary school having those close
relationships with with the experiment station I
think let's see then he's followed by Frank
Vandiver Frank now Frank Vandiver is is a person
that wasn't in my opinion wasn't well liked on this
campus but he was an intellectual giant I'm his
first doctoral student oh is that right well I'm
not I'm not telling you anything you don't already
know but he was so far ahead of his time on so many
different things uh I don't I don't remember his
having too much The veterinary school was sort of
like a stepchild to much of the campus.
Let's see, I think it was in his time that we became a
line item as opposed to, you know, I think that was
the time. So our funding was pretty much set, you
know, we were somewhat independent of the... And
then there's Mobley.
Mobley was...
To the typist, that's President William Mobley,
M-O-B-L-E-Y. Right, right. I don't remember
Mobley having much impact on
the vet school either. at that let's see now about
that time let's see Shelton was stepping down and
all right Dean Shattuck all right Dean Gage by then
is over as the chief academic officer that's right
what difference did it make to have a veterinary
faculty member over as the as the provost to us
faculty it didn't didn't make much difference at
all we probably saw a few more we probably had more
there was more impact of the potential of the
veterinary curriculum and well I believe it was
about that time that the biomedical science
program that actually Al Price had initiated what
if describe that program from the faculty point of
view okay yeah there's that program emerged about
the same time that the quote unquote threat of
another vet school at Texas Tech was coming up and
this is kind of a side story but it's somewhat
relevant Al
Price decided or someone decided and I presume it
was Al Price decided that instead of having the
program go four years, make it a three-year,
year-round program. And that way, we would be
meeting, the rationale for another school was
that there weren't enough veterinary, slots for
veterinary students, and Al, or somebody, and I
think it was Al's idea that to have a three-year
program as opposed to a four-year program would
meet all the requirements for the, in fact, That
was the time, that came about the time when there
was a surplus, a so-called surplus of PhDs and a
surplus, potential surplus of many of the
professions. And so that, I believe that was the
argument that was used to kind of defeat the...
Okay, now, the biomedical science program, there
was also a pre-vet curriculum. On the campus. And
so it, in effect, replaced pre-vet, did it not?
Yeah, that's what they wanted it to do. That was the
ration. I mean, that's what the veterinary
profession, you know, the veterinary powers that
be wanted it to do. And it included then students
who might go into other health-related... They
didn't, yes, they didn't want to say that it was a
pre-vet program. They wanted it to, I mean, they
wanted it to be a program that would meet, and Al
Price was the strong proponent of that. In fact, I
believe that was his brainchild, really. Did that
bring a lot, that obviously brought a lot more
students to interact with veterinary faculty?
Well, yes, definitely. Definitely. That served a
two-fold purpose. Again, from the faculty, you
know, back to the faculty, if I had been department
head, I would have wanted to look at it, or
administrative, I'd want to look at it from
another, but from the faculty point of view, it
gave justification for more teaching activity,
justification for more positions and that sort of
thing by essentially creating courses that
That'd be great.
And so the biomedical science program was again
Al Price's brainchild. It gave raison d'etre for
many of the faculty. And it ultimately had a
positive effect. At first, it seemed like it was
kind of a hocus. I mean, I'm expressing my own view
at that time. I don't think it is. Ultimately, it's
a very worthwhile program. But at that time, it
seemed to be a way that the veterinary
activities could capture more people from the
campus. and instead of their going over to the
campus to take the courses, they would come over to
the vet school to take the course. Of course, they
said that that's taking away too many resources
from the school, but in actual practice, that, you
know, we were sort of talking out of both sides of
our mouth. And so we were able then to get not only
line item funds, but, you know, formula funds too.
Now, during the the 70s, 80s, 90s, women began to
enroll in veterinary medicine in increasingly
large numbers. Yes. Give some examples. How did
that change? Before I answer that, let me point out
that the young lady that was the first vet student
happened to work with Wayne Moore as a part-time.
so I didn't get I didn't know her you know very well
but she was part of the team that was taking care of
the swine and and so forth yeah this is this is for
you if you if you've already got that well no what
happens no thank you um
but uh she
I don't know how much truth there was to anything,
but she was kind of attacked, her morals were
attacked. Some were saying that she was sleeping
around. She had responsibilities out there in
veterinary research. You may not want to include
this in anything that you, but this is just sort of
the background. She wasn't well received by the
faculty, by the students. in general and they made
allegations that she was sleeping around and that
she was actually sleeping out there in some of the
facilities out there in Veterinary Research Park
she and some other guy who were dating who were
actually dating and they were seen out there a lot
of times but I don't think they were doing there was
any hanky panky okay now the how did the advent of
female students well first of all you know, there
were all kinds of quips and comments made about,
well, how can a little thing like a lady help
deliver a calf? I mean, sort of like women just
aren't equipped to be veterinarians they're just
not big enough they're not strong enough they
don't have the they don't have the how many of them
have ever even ridden a horse you know and of course
that's just about any any person that grew up on the
farm as I said but there's just no way that they had
the experiences but nonetheless
they were admitted in in increasing large numbers
and I believe Probably three years after, three,
maybe four years after they started admitting
females, about 50% of the class was female. And I
think because of the academic selection process,
I don't know whether these statistics are valid or
not, but generally the ladies will perform better
academically than will the men. That's what I
heard. And so if the selection criteria were based
primarily on grades, and they were, then it's
reasonable to think that an increasingly larger
number of girls would enter the class. And in the
same period, more women joined the faculty.
Well, let's see. Let me think now. Weren't there a
few? There were a few, but not a large number. Let's
see. Now, I can think of, well, Mary Heron was on the
faculty. And she was brought in largely because of
the Department Head of Anatomy. was a good friend
with Mike Herron, who was a clinician. So this is a
package of the two? Yeah, yeah. Then, let's see.
I don't know if there's any relationship. I don't
know what the relationship may be of this, but
Bonnie Beaver was also another. And she'd be a good
one, too. I've already interviewed her. Oh, okay.
She was brought in. Then over in the clinic area,
oh gee, I'm drawing a blank on her name. I know her
quite well now. She's the oncologist, but she was a
third one that was a female faculty member. What
about the cat lady? She was there for quite a while.
What's her name?
I'm drawing a blank. I don't know. There weren't
but three or four out of an entire faculty of about
200 at that time. And then as
soon as the non-DVM-PhD mold was broken, a large
number of potent, you know, stellar. That's in the
in the 80s? That's in the mid-80s. Mid-80s? Yeah.
Then started bringing in some People that had, you
know, NIH types, several of the people that are
there now were, you know, were pretty well known in
their area from other areas. Compare, in a broad
sense, compare the veterinary medical students
today in terms of their background and their
capability and their interests with those when
you first joined faculty? Oh,
frankly, the students, even though they're
younger, number one, they're more mature. They
seem to be more mature.
I don't know if it's intellectual
capability or whether it's just, but the students
today are much more sophisticated. They're much
more than the students back then. The students
back then, well, there may have been some
modeling, too, back then. The students back then
were more, you might have trouble distinguishing
the students from,
that were shoeing horses from veterinary
students. I mean, the people that were shoeing
horses and, you know, they were, back then, they
were not real, you know, science oriented and
certainly not computer oriented or anything like
that. But today they are. And today's students are
more urban? In their background? Very much more.
Very much more. And very much savvy with regard to
health issues, you know, and interested in
health-related issues. In terms of their
interests, large animal, small animal, or
whatever, has that changed much? Yeah. Yep, it
has. How?
Fewer and fewer in the... Well, there's still a
significant number in food animal, you know,
cattle type interest. Fewer in equine practices,
so, and the other practices are negligible. Small
animal is probably, I would imagine, I haven't
looked at the statistics, frankly, but my sense is
that the majority of the people that graduate from
vet school these days are interested in small
animal. And many are interested in academics. And
that surprises me. Many are interested in
research and academics. And I think that speaks
well of the, you know, the academic environment in
the vet school as opposed to several years ago. And
I presume that geographically they are quite
diverse from all over Texas. All over Texas with
the preponderance, no, still again, the
preponderance from the metropolitan areas.
Yeah, but whether it's Amarillo or Corpus Christi
or whatever. Right. And are they more diverse as to
where they did their undergraduate degree than
they used to be? I
believe the... Frankly, the largest number of
people that do their, well, a significant number
of biomedical science students, you know, here on
this campus, from this campus. But I don't say that
they're the majority. I think probably next in the
order of undergraduate programs are from,
there's a large number of them from the University
of Texas. And that's, you know, I would be kind of
surprised about that. Right now, after you were
the interim department head, you went back to the
department, and what have been your duties in
recent years? Well, I had a fairly active research
program. In fact, my research program grew. I was
doing a lot. What were the primary topics?
Primarily various aspects of aquatic animal
medicine. I started to say, and I forgot about it,
one of the things that... that Frank Vandiver did
he had a he called a conference together or called a
group together to explore water issues
and he was he was wanting a brainstorming session
he called a group of people together to do it for a
brainstorming session that had to do with with
water issues and one of the things that I had
suggested that we have a training program for
veterinarians, and that we call it Aquamed.
Aquahunt? Aquamed. Aquamed.
He was really excited about that, and so he
advanced something like $20,000 to support that
program, which is more really than we needed, but
we subsequently
I guess I'm kind of getting off the subject. I
forgot what the topic was, but the point is that
Aquamed was something that lasted for about, I
mean, from Texas A&M it lasted until about the 91 or
92, and another guy and I headed it up. We would go
down to Galveston, for a couple of weeks and we had
students from all the veterinary schools, I mean
from, you know, several of the veterinary schools
across the country to come in and invest, you know,
be exposed to various fish, mammal, you know,
aquatic animal topics there on the campus, just
hands on. dissecting the fish and looking at
parasites and those kind of things. Going out on an
oyster lover. Yeah. Yeah, a very intensive
two-week program, and we just sort of took over the
campus. But that was through Frank Vanderburg.
Now, let's see, we were talking about, I forgot.
Well, what you're... Yeah, what I was doing, yeah,
after I stepped down. Okay, so one of the things I
did was to, one of the things I was involved in was
the development of that program, the Aquamed
program, which still exists.
But we're not, Texas A&M doesn't have a major
portion, part in it now. I had a building that, out
on the Veterinary Research Park, I set up a closed
recirculating system
for maintaining
fish and shrimp and various aquatic species under
fairly defined conditions. I had a lot of fun in
trying to design that. I'd never done anything
like that before.
I mean, we could maintain the right temperature,
right oxygen concentration, salinity, you know,
all those kind of things. And I was pretty well
funded at that time. I was able to, I had about, oh,
let's see, I had a technician, I had three
technicians and one research associate, and then
I had several graduate students working with me.
We occupied the building that formerly was known
as the Tropical Veterinary Medical Institute.
That's another, that's something, that's
another topic that could, I wasn't involved in,
but that's something that the veterinary school
had a, was a very good program for several years.
But anyway, when that program was abandoned, then
I had the opportunity to move out there in that
facility, and I moved out there, and I spent much of
my time there. Then
I was involved in an automobile accident. and that
I mean it was actually in a wheelchair for quite
some time and I couldn't get around very well and so
I
wasn't inclined to do very much research writing I
was teaching a course I was asked to teach a course
it wasn't forced upon me but when they asked me I was
happy to do so so I started teaching a course on
immunology I also started teaching the course on
fish diseases I was teaching a course on
microbiology and because I was wasn't able to get
around very well my program sort of I mean for a
number of reasons my program folded my principal
technician decided she'd been there for about 20
years with me and so she decided that she wanted to
retire and so when she retired well we didn't she
was getting paid out of experiment station funds
and we you know we moved those well make a long story
short I moved up to the main building and I didn't
have extensive laboratory but then I got
interested in doing um all interactive uh
computer-based web-based instructional
distance learning I wrote a project
for the USDA a competitive project and involved
that involved several of the other veterinary
schools and we taught a course via satellite tv one
summer no one spring that involved the six the six
veterinary schools Auburn, Mississippi,
Alabama, Florida,
Tuskegee, and ourselves. And we formed what was
called an aquatic pathobiology consortium. But
through the USDA, we got funding to put that thing
up on satellite TV and made it available across the
country. And we actually offered the course,
probably one of the first courses, maybe not, but I
think it was probably one of the first courses that
we had, that the A&M had, and we broadcast it to
every veterinary school in the North American
continent. They had down links from all, and we
got, it was sort of a, The last part of each session,
these were two lectures a week, and the last part of
each session was kind of like a Larry King Live.
They would call in questions and that sort of
thing, and we'd interact with them and had a lot of
fun doing that. Then following that, we put
together a Pew Foundation grant to formalize the
interaction between the vet schools. And I, at
that time, was becoming more involved in distance
education. And that's essentially where I've
been focusing my efforts now. I now teach a TTVN
course to Galveston, usually in the fall. And I
taught it in the spring a couple of times. And I've
designed interactive CDs for course and for the
fish disease course and for the microbiology
course these are CDs that the entire course is on a
CD and so that's sort of what we do what I've been
doing and
I'm not sure you know where is where is where is all
this going I you know we really My
intent several years ago was to try to get the
veterinary profession involved in fish health
issues. I proposed that been rearing fish for
thousands of years in China and Asia, and it's the
most efficient source of protean worldwide. and
it's it's certainly a potential industry here in
here in the state and in fact we've helped kind of
establish the shrimp industry here in Texas
they've had some crashes but The funding doesn't
seem to be there. I'm not sure whether the
veterinary profession is ever going to be aligned
to fish culture or not. It's kind of one of those
industries. I think the swine industry sort of
went the same way. The veterinary profession is
not, at least not here in Texas. There's certain
areas in Minnesota and certain areas that that the
pork industries use veterinary profession now
there's another thing that I guess we're running
out of time or something we've got another half
hour oh okay
this doesn't necessarily relate to me but it does
kind of relate to me it relates to a perception that
I have the Department of Veterinary Microbiology
was merged with Veterinary Pathology. And that
was the general trend to merge departments. I
guess they did that in most institutions across
the country. But microbiology was by far the more
aggressive, I mean, several people in the
department that were very aggressive in in
extramural you know seeking extramural funds
plus there was a fairly strong poultry program you
know that had to do with poultry and that was led by
Charlie and Charles Hall and Leland Grumbles they
were recognized nationwide as as really the
number one people in the poultry area and the state
poultry is a big it was and still is a big industry in
in Texas
but kind of simultaneous to the to the emergence of
microbiology and pathology the poultry
activities were shifted from the department over
to the diagnostic lab we'll see that and that's
that's reasonable that it should have been I mean
diagnostic activity should but you see we some of
our faculty that we had faculty members that were
stationed at the various strategic areas around
the states I mean, their primary responsibility,
they were veterinary experiment station
appointments, but they were situated in the heart
of the poultry industry. And so they were
identifying some problems and were getting
funding. I mean, they were the source of funding
for a number of, for a lot of poultry disease
research. But following the merge of the two
departments, pathology and microbiology, that
activity essentially went to the diagnostic lab
and so the reason for the poultry program that
existed in the department was gone. And some of the
key players
went elsewhere at that time. They went to USDA Ames
and Cornell and some of the other places because
they were the second generation of poultry
people. But when that poultry area was lost, well,
then they left. And I think, I'm not sure we're, we
may be better off as a result of it, but I'm not sure
we didn't lose an opportunity there. And I think
we probably, It may be 20 or 30 years before
veterinary medicine starts looking at aquatic
animal medicine in a serious way. But at some
point, it will have to because that's going to be an
area of food and so forth down the way. And I teach a
course to veterinary students on fish diseases.
To have 15 students that will, 15 or so students
that will, they have a very busy schedule. This is
called a didactic elective. And to even have five
students that are willing to take a course is kind
of unusual. But I routinely have 10 to 15 students
sign up for that course. It's a two-week course,
and it deals with diseases of fish. And so I think
from that seed, I think at some future point,
there'll be students, veterinarians that'll be
more focused on fish diseases. Let's summarize
this more than 30 years experience. Of all that
you've done here, what's been your most enjoyable
task? Oh, gee. What was the most pleasant, most
fun? Well, the...
Actually...
I've just had a lot of fun doing everything. I mean,
it's the research, the working with the EIA virus
and the identification of the, you know, to do
something, to kind of pioneer something. I've had
an opportunity to pioneer at least two things. You
know, that and the aquatic animal area.
That's been, and... You had fun with... being a
consultant today.